Title: The Book of Job

Author: Anonymous

Author of introduction, etc.: G. K. Chesterton

Illustrator: C. Mary Tongue

Release date: April 3, 2025 [eBook #75778]

Language: English

Original publication: London: Cecil Palmer & Hayward, 1916

Credits: Carla Foust, Brian Wilson, Tim Lindell and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries)


The text of this Reprint of the
Book of Job is that of the
authorized version, with
certain differences in
the manner of
printing.

FIRST
EDITION
1916



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS
INTRODUCTION
THE BOOK OF JOB
CHAPTER 1
CHAPTER 2
CHAPTER 3
CHAPTER 4
CHAPTER 5
CHAPTER 6
CHAPTER 7
CHAPTER 8
CHAPTER 9
CHAPTER 10
CHAPTER 11
CHAPTER 12
CHAPTER 13
CHAPTER 14
CHAPTER 15
CHAPTER 16
CHAPTER 17
CHAPTER 18
CHAPTER 19
CHAPTER 20
CHAPTER 21
CHAPTER 22
CHAPTER 23
CHAPTER 24
CHAPTER 25
CHAPTER 26
CHAPTER 27
CHAPTER 28
CHAPTER 29
CHAPTER 30
CHAPTER 31
CHAPTER 32
CHAPTER 33
CHAPTER 34
CHAPTER 35
CHAPTER 36
CHAPTER 37
CHAPTER 38
CHAPTER 39
CHAPTER 40
CHAPTER 41
CHAPTER 42


[Pg ix]

The Book of Job is among the other Old Testament
Books both a philosophical riddle and a
historical riddle. It is the philosophical riddle
that concerns us in such an introduction as this; so we
may dismiss first the few words of general explanation
or warning which should be said about the historical
aspect. Controversy has long raged about which parts
of this epic belong to its original scheme and which are
interpolations of considerably later date. The doctors
disagree, as it is the business of doctors to do; but upon
the whole the trend of investigation has always been in
the direction of maintaining that the parts interpolated,
if any, were the prose prologue and epilogue and possibly
the speech of the young man who comes in with
an apology at the end. I do not profess to be competent
to decide such questions. But whatever decision the
reader may come to concerning them, there is a general
truth to be remembered in this connection. When
you deal with any ancient artistic creation do not
suppose that it is anything against it that it grew gradually.
The Book of Job may have grown gradually just
as Westminster Abbey grew gradually. But the people
who made the old folk poetry, like the people who
made Westminster Abbey, did not attach that importance
[Pg x]to the actual date and the actual author, that
importance which is entirely the creation of the almost
insane individualism of modern times. We may put
aside the case of Job, as one complicated with religious
difficulties, and take any other, say the case of the Iliad.
Many people have maintained the characteristic formula
of modern scepticism, that Homer was not written
by Homer, but by another person of the same name.
Just in the same way many have maintained that Moses
was not Moses but another person called Moses. But
the thing really to be remembered in the matter of the
Iliad is that if other people did interpolate the passages,
the thing did not create the same sense of shock as
would be created by such proceedings in these individualistic
times. The creation of the tribal epic was
to some extent regarded as a tribal work, like the
building of the tribal temple. Believe then, if you will,
that the prologue of Job and the epilogue and the speech
of Elihu are things inserted after the original work was
composed. But do not suppose that such insertions
have that obvious and spurious character which would
belong to any insertions in a modern individualistic
book. Do not regard the insertions as you would regard
a chapter in George Meredith which you afterwards
found had not been written by George Meredith, or
[Pg xi]half a scene in Ibsen which you found had been cunningly
sneaked in by Mr. William Archer. Remember
that this old world which made these old poems like
the Iliad and Job, always kept the tradition of what it
was making. A man could almost leave a poem to his
son to be finished as he would have finished it, just as
a man could leave a field to his son, to be reaped as he
would have reaped it. What is called Homeric unity
may be a fact or not. The Iliad may have been written
by one man. It may have been written by a hundred
men. But let us remember that there was more unity
in those times in a hundred men than there is unity
now in one man. Then a city was like one man. Now
one man is like a city in civil war.

Without going, therefore, into questions of unity
as understood by the scholars, we may say of the scholarly
riddle that the book has unity in the sense that all
great traditional creations have unity; in the sense that
Canterbury Cathedral has unity. And the same is
broadly true of what I have called the philosophical
riddle. There is a real sense in which the Book of Job
stands apart from most of the books included in the
canon of the Old Testament. But here again those
are wrong who insist on the entire absence of unity.
Those are wrong who maintain that the Old Testament
[Pg xii]is a mere loose library; that it has no consistency
or aim. Whether the result was achieved by
some supernal spiritual truth, or by a steady national
tradition, or merely by an ingenious selection in after
times, the books of the Old Testament have a quite
perceptible unity. To attempt to understand the Old
Testament without realizing this main idea is as absurd
as it would be to study one of Shakespeare’s plays without
realizing that the author of them had any philosophical
object at all. It is as if a man were to read
the history of Hamlet, Prince of Denmark, thinking all
the time that he was reading what really purported
to be the history of an old Danish pirate prince. Such
a reader would not realize at all that Hamlet’s procrastination
was on the part of the poet intentional.
He would merely say, “How long Shakespeare’s hero
does take to kill his enemy.” So speak the Bible smashers,
who are unfortunately always at bottom Bible worshippers.
They do not understand the special tone
and intention of the Old Testament; they do not understand
its main idea, which is the idea of all men being
merely the instruments of a higher power.

Those, for instance, who complain of the atrocities
and treacheries of the judges and prophets of Israel
have really got a notion in their head that has nothing
[Pg xiii]to do with the subject. They are too Christian. They
are reading back into the pre-Christian scriptures a
purely Christian idea—the idea of saints, the idea that
the chief instruments of God are very particularly good
men. This is a deeper, a more daring, and a more interesting
idea than the old Jewish one. It is the idea
that innocence has about it something terrible which
in the long run makes and re-makes empires and the
world. But the Old Testament idea was much more
what may be called the common-sense idea, that
strength is strength, that cunning is cunning, that
worldly success is worldly success, and that Jehovah
uses these things for His own ultimate purpose, just as
He uses natural forces or physical elements. He uses the
strength of a hero as He uses that of a Mammoth—without
any particular respect for the Mammoth. I
cannot comprehend how it is that so many simple-minded
sceptics have read such stories as the fraud of
Jacob and supposed that the man who wrote it (whoever
he was) did not know that Jacob was a sneak just
as well as we do. The primeval human sense of honour
does not change so much as that. But these simple-minded
sceptics are, like the majority of modern sceptics,
Christians. They fancy that the patriarchs must
be meant for patterns; they fancy that Jacob was being
[Pg xiv]set up as some kind of saint; and in that case I do
not wonder that they are a little startled. That is not
the atmosphere of the Old Testament at all. The
heroes of the Old Testament are not the sons of God,
but the slaves of God, gigantic and terrible slaves, like
the genii, who were the slaves of Aladdin.

The central idea of the great part of the Old
Testament may be called the idea of the loneliness of
God. God is not the only chief character of the Old
Testament; God is properly the only character in the
Old Testament. Compared with His clearness of purpose
all the other wills are heavy and automatic, like
those of animals; compared with His actuality all the
sons of flesh are shadows. Again and again the note is
struck, “With whom hath he taken counsel?” “I have
trodden the wine press alone, and of the peoples there
was no man with me.” All the patriarchs and prophets
are merely His tools or weapons; for the Lord is a man
of war. He uses Joshua like an axe or Moses like a
measuring-rod. For Him Samson is only a sword and
Isaiah a trumpet. The saints of Christianity are supposed
to be like God, to be, as it were, little statuettes
of Him. The Old Testament hero is no more supposed
to be of the same nature as God than a saw or a hammer
is supposed to be of the same shape as the carpenter.
[Pg xv]This is the main key and characteristic of the Hebrew
scriptures as a whole. There are, indeed, in those
scriptures innumerable instances of the sort of rugged
humour, keen emotion, and powerful individuality
which is never wanting in great primitive prose and
poetry. Nevertheless the main characteristic remains;
the sense not merely that God is stronger than man,
not merely that God is more secret than man, but that
He means more, that He knows better what He is doing,
that compared with Him we have something of the
vagueness, the unreason, and the vagrancy of the beasts
that perish. “It is he that sitteth above the earth, and
the inhabitants thereof are as grasshoppers.” We might
almost put it thus. The book is so intent upon asserting
the personality of God that it almost asserts the impersonality
of man. Unless this gigantic cosmic brain
has conceived a thing, that thing is insecure and void;
man has not enough tenacity to ensure its continuance.
“Except the Lord build the house their labour
is but lost that build it. Except the Lord keep the city
the watchman watcheth but in vain.”

Everywhere else, then, the Old Testament positively
rejoices in the obliteration of man in comparison
with the divine purpose. The Book of Job stands definitely
alone because the Book of Job definitely asks,
[Pg xvi]“But what is the purpose of God? Is it worth the
sacrifice even of our miserable humanity? Of course it
is easy enough to wipe out our own paltry wills for the
sake of a will that is grander and kinder. But is it
grander and kinder? Let God use His tools; let God
break His tools. But what is He doing and what are
they being broken for?” It is because of this question
that we have to attack as a philosophical riddle the
riddle of the Book of Job.

The present importance of the Book of Job cannot
be expressed adequately even by saying that it is
the most interesting of ancient books. We may almost
say of the Book of Job that it is the most interesting of
modern books. In truth, of course, neither of the two
phrases covers the matter, because fundamental human
religion and fundamental human irreligion are both
at once old and new; philosophy is either eternal or
it is not philosophy. The modern habit of saying,
“This is my opinion, but I may be wrong,” is entirely
irrational. If I say that it may be wrong I say that is
not my opinion. The modern habit of saying “Every
man has a different philosophy; this is my philosophy
and its suits me”; the habit of saying this is mere
weak-mindedness. A cosmic philosophy is not constructed
to fit a man; a cosmic philosophy is constructed
[Pg xvii]to fit a cosmos. A man can no more possess a private
religion than he can possess a private sun and moon.

The first of the intellectual beauties of the Book
of Job is that it is all concerned with this desire to know
the actuality; the desire to know what is, and not merely
what seems. If moderns were writing the book we
should probably find that Job and his comforters got
on quite well together by the simple operation of referring
their differences to what is called the temperament,
saying that the comforters were by nature “optimists”
and Job by nature a “pessimist.” And they would be
quite comfortable, as people can often be, for some
time at least, by agreeing to say what is obviously untrue.
For if the word “pessimist” means anything at
all, then emphatically Job is not a pessimist. His case
alone is sufficient to refute the modern absurdity of
referring everything to physical temperament. Job does
not in any sense look at life in a gloomy way. If wishing
to be happy and being quite ready to be happy
constitute an optimist, Job is an optimist. He is a perplexed
optimist; he is an exasperated optimist; he is
an outraged and insulted optimist. He wishes the universe
to justify itself, not because he wishes it to be
caught out, but because he really wishes it to be justified.
He demands an explanation from God, but he does not
[Pg xviii]do it at all in the spirit in which Hampden might demand
an explanation from Charles I. He does it in the
spirit in which a wife might demand an explanation
from her husband whom she really respected. He remonstrates
with his Maker because he is proud of his
Maker. He even speaks of the Almighty as his enemy,
but he never doubts, at the back of his mind, that his
enemy has some kind of a case which he does not understand.
In a fine and famous blasphemy he says, “Oh,
that mine adversary had written a book!” It never
really occurs to him that it could possibly be a bad book.
He is anxious to be convinced, that is, he thinks that
God could convince him. In short, we may say again
that if the word optimist means any thing (which I doubt)
Job is an optimist. He shakes the pillars of the world
and strikes insanely at the heavens; he lashes the stars,
but it is not to silence them; it is to make them speak.

In the same way we may speak of the official
optimists, the Comforters of Job. Again, if the word
pessimist means anything (which I doubt) the comforters
of Job may be called pessimists rather than optimists.
All that they really believe is not that God is
good but that God is so strong that it is much more
judicious to call Him good. It would be the exaggeration
of censure to call them evolutionists; but they have
[Pg xix]something of the vital error of the evolutionary optimist.
They will keep on saying that everything in the universe
fits into everything else: as if there were anything
comforting about a number of nasty things all fitting
into each other. We shall see later how God in the
great climax of the poem turns this particular argument
altogether upside down.

When, at the end of the poem, God enters (somewhat
abruptly), is struck the sudden and splendid note
which makes the thing as great as it is. All the human
beings through the story, and Job especially, have been
asking questions of God. A more trivial poet would
have made God enter in some sense or other in order
to answer the questions. By a touch truly to be called
inspired, when God enters, it is to ask a number more
questions on His own account. In this drama of scepticism
God Himself takes up the rôle of sceptic. He does
what all the great voices defending religion have always
done. He does, for instance, what Socrates did. He
turns rationalism against itself. He seems to say that if it
comes to asking questions, He can ask some questions
which will fling down and flatten out all conceivable
human questioners. The poet by an exquisite intuition
has made God ironically accept a kind of controversial
equality with His accusers. He is willing to regard
[Pg xx]it as if it were a fair intellectual duel: “Gird up now
thy loins like a man; for I will demand of thee, and
answer thou me.” The everlasting adopts an enormous
and sardonic humility. He is quite willing to be prosecuted.
He only asks for the right which every prosecuted
person possesses; He asks to be allowed to cross-examine
the witness for the prosecution. And He
carries yet further the correctness of the legal parallel.
For the first question, essentially speaking, which He
asks of Job is the question that any criminal accused by
Job would be most entitled to ask. He asks Job who he
is. And Job, being a man of candid intellect, takes a
little time to consider, and comes to the conclusion
that he does not know.

This is the first great fact to notice about the
speech of God, which is the culmination of the inquiry.
It represents all human sceptics routed by a higher
scepticism. It is this method, used sometimes by
supreme and sometimes by mediocre minds, that has
ever since been the logical weapon of the true mystic.
Socrates, as I have said, used it when he showed that
if you only allowed him enough sophistry he could
destroy all the sophists. Jesus Christ used it when He
reminded the Sadducees, who could not imagine the
nature of marriage in heaven, that if it came to that
[Pg xxi]they had not really imagined the nature of marriage
at all. In the break up of Christian theology in the
eighteenth century, Butler used it, when he pointed
out that rationalistic arguments could be used as much
against vague religion as against doctrinal religion, as
much against rationalist ethics as against Christian
ethics. It is the root and reason of the fact that men
who have religious faith have also philosophic doubt,
like Cardinal Newman, Mr. Balfour, or Mr. Mallock.
These are the small streams of the delta; the Book of
Job is the first great cataract that creates the river. In
dealing with the arrogant asserter of doubt, it is not
the right method to tell him to stop doubting. It is
rather the right method to tell him to go on doubting,
to doubt a little more, to doubt every day newer and
wilder things in the universe, until at last, by some
strange enlightenment, he may begin to doubt himself.

This, I say, is the first fact touching the speech;
the fine inspiration by which God comes in at the end,
not to answer riddles, but to propound them. The
other great fact which, taken together with this one,
makes the whole work religious instead of merely
philosophical, is that other great surprise which makes
Job suddenly satisfied with the mere presentation of
something impenetrable. Verbally speaking the enigmas
[Pg xxii]of Jehovah seem darker and more desolate than
the enigmas of Job; yet Job was comfortless before the
speech of Jehovah and is comforted after it. He has
been told nothing, but he feels the terrible and tingling
atmosphere of something which is too good to
be told. The refusal of God to explain His design is
itself a burning hint of His design. The riddles of
God are more satisfying than the solutions of man.

Thirdly, of course, it is one of the splendid
strokes that God rebukes alike the man who accused,
and the men who defended Him; that He knocks
down pessimists and optimists with the same hammer.
And it is in connection with the mechanical and supercilious
comforters of Job that there occurs the still
deeper and finer inversion of which I have spoken.
The mechanical optimist endeavours to justify the
universe avowedly upon the ground that it is a rational
and consecutive pattern. He points out that the fine
thing about the world is that it can all be explained.
That is the one point, if I may put it so, on which
God in return, is explicit to the point of violence.
God says, in effect, that if there is one fine thing about
the world, as far as men are concerned, it is that it
cannot be explained. He insists on the inexplicableness
of everything; “Hath the rain a father?...
[Pg xxiii]Out of whose womb came the ice?” He goes farther,
and insists on the positive and palpable unreason of
things; “Hast thou sent the rain upon the desert where
no man is, and upon the wilderness wherein there is
no man?” God will make man see things, if it is only
against the black background of nonentity. God will
make Job see a startling universe if He can only do
it by making Job see an idiotic universe. To startle
man God becomes for an instant a blasphemer; one
might almost say that God becomes for an instant an
atheist. He unrolls before Job a long panorama of
created things, the horse, the eagle, the raven, the
wild ass, the peacock, the ostrich, the crocodile. He
so describes each of them that it sounds like a monster
walking in the sun. The whole is a sort of psalm
or rhapsody of the sense of wonder. The maker of all
things is astonished at the things He has Himself made.

This we may call the third point. Job puts forward
a note of interrogation; God answers with a note
of exclamation. Instead of proving to Job that it is an
explicable world, He insists that it is a much stranger
world than Job ever thought it was. Lastly, the poet
has achieved in this speech, with that unconscious artistic
accuracy found in so many of the simpler epics,
another and much more delicate thing. Without once
[Pg xxiv]relaxing the rigid impenetrability of Jehovah in His
deliberate declaration, he has contrived to let fall here
and there in the metaphors, in the parenthetical imagery,
sudden and splendid suggestions that the secret of God
is a bright and not a sad one—semi-accidental suggestions,
like light seen for an instant through the cracks
of a closed door. It would be difficult to praise too
highly, in a purely poetical sense, the instinctive
exactitude and ease with which these more optimistic
insinuations are let fall in other connections, as if the
Almighty Himself were scarcely aware that He was
letting them out. For instance, there is that famous
passage where Jehovah with devastating sarcasm, asks
Job where he was when the foundations of the world
were laid, and then (as if merely fixing a date) mentions
the time when the sons of God shouted for joy. One
cannot help feeling, even upon this meagre information,
that they must have had something to shout about. Or
again, when God is speaking of snow and hail in the
mere catalogue of the physical cosmos, He speaks of
them as a treasury that He has laid up against the day
of battle—a hint of some huge Armageddon in which
evil shall be at last overthrown.

Nothing could be better, artistically speaking,
than this optimism breaking through agnosticism like
[Pg xxv]fiery gold round the edges of a black cloud. Those who
look superficially at the barbaric origin of the epic may
think it fanciful to read so much artistic significance
into its casual similes or accidental phrases. But no one
who is well acquainted with great examples of semi-barbaric
poetry, as in the Song of Roland or the
old ballads, will fall into this mistake. No one who
knows what primitive poetry is, can fail to realize that
while its conscious form is simple some of its finer
effects are subtle. The Iliad contrives to express the
idea that Hector and Sarpedon have a certain tone or
tint of sad and chivalrous resignation, not bitter enough
to be called pessimism and not jovial enough to be called
optimism; Homer could never have said this in elaborate
words. But somehow he contrives to say it in
simple words. The Song of Roland contrives to express
the idea that Christianity imposes upon its heroes a
paradox: a paradox of great humility in the matter of
their sins combined with great ferocity in the matter of
their ideas. Of course the Song of Roland could not
say this; but it conveys this. In the same way the Book
of Job must be credited with many subtle effects which
were in the author’s soul without being, perhaps, in the
author’s mind. And of these by far the most important
remains even yet to be stated. I do not know, and I
[Pg xxvi]doubt whether even scholars know, if the Book of Job
had a great effect or had any effect upon the after
development of Jewish thought. But if it did have any
effect it may have saved them from an enormous collapse
and decay. Here in this Book the question is really
asked whether God invariably punishes vice with terrestrial
punishment and rewards virtue with terrestrial
prosperity. If the Jews had answered that question
wrongly they might have lost all their after influence in
human history. They might have sunk even down to
the level of modern well educated society. For when
once people have begun to believe that prosperity is
the reward of virtue their next calamity is obvious.
If prosperity is regarded as the reward of virtue it will
be regarded as the symptom of virtue. Men will leave
off the heavy task of making good men successful.
They will adopt the easier task of making out successful
men good. This, which has happened throughout
modern commerce and journalism, is the ultimate
Nemesis of the wicked optimism of the comforters
of Job. If the Jews could be saved from it, the Book
of Job saved them. The Book of Job is chiefly remarkable,
as I have insisted throughout, for the fact that
it does not end in a way that is conventionally satisfactory.
Job is not told that his misfortunes were due
[Pg xxvii]to his sins or a part of any plan for his improvement.
But in the prologue we see Job tormented not because
he was the worst of men, but because he was the best.
It is the lesson of the whole work that man is most
comforted by paradoxes. Here is the very darkest and
strangest of the paradoxes; and it is by all human
testimony the most reassuring. I need not suggest
what a high and strange history awaited this
paradox of the best man in the worst fortune.
I need not say that in the freest and most
philosophical sense there is one Old
Testament figure who is truly a type;
or say what is pre-figured in the
wounds of Job.

[Pg 1]

There was a man in the land of Uz, whose
name was Job; and that man was perfect
and upright, and one that feared God, and
eschewed evil. And there were born unto
him seven sons and three daughters. His
substance also was seven thousand sheep, and three
thousand camels, and five hundred yoke of oxen, and
five hundred she asses, and a very great household;
so that this man was the greatest of all the men of the
east. And his sons went and feasted in their houses,
every one his day; and sent and called for their three
sisters to eat and to drink with them. And it was so,
when the days of their feasting were gone about, that
Job sent and sanctified them, and rose up early in the
morning, and offered burnt offerings according to
the number of them all: for Job said, It may be that
my sons have sinned, and cursed God in their hearts.
Thus did Job continually. Now there was a day when
the sons of God came to present themselves before
the Lord, and Satan came also among them. And the
Lord said unto Satan, Whence comest thou? Then
Satan answered the Lord, and said, From going to
and fro in the earth, and from walking up and down
[Pg 2]in it. And the Lord said unto Satan, Hast thou considered
my servant Job, that there is none like him
in the earth, a perfect and an upright man, one that
feareth God, and escheweth evil? Then Satan answered
the Lord, and said, Doth Job fear God for nought?
Hast not thou made an hedge about him, and about
his house, and about all that he hath on every side?
thou hast blessed the work of his hands, and his substance
is increased in the land. But put forth thine
hand now, and touch all that he hath, and he will
curse thee to thy face. And the Lord said unto Satan,
Behold, all that he hath is in thy power; only upon
himself put not forth thine hand. So Satan went forth
from the presence of the Lord.

And there was a day when his sons and his
daughters were eating and drinking wine in their eldest
brother’s house: and there came a messenger unto Job,
and said, The oxen were plowing, and the asses feeding
beside them: and the Sabeans fell upon them, and
took them away; yea, they have slain the servants with
the edge of the sword; and I only am escaped alone to tell
thee. While he was yet speaking, there came also another,
and said, The fire of God is fallen from heaven, and hath
burned up the sheep, and the servants, and consumed
them; and I only am escaped alone to tell thee. While
[Pg 3]he was yet speaking, there came also another, and said,
The Chaldeans made out three bands, and fell upon the
camels, and have carried them away, yea, and slain
the servants with the edge of the sword; and I only
am escaped alone to tell thee. While he was yet speaking,
there came also another, and said, Thy sons and
thy daughters were eating and drinking wine in their
eldest brother’s house: and, behold, there came a
great wind from the wilderness, and smote the four
corners of the house, and it fell upon the young men,
and they are dead; and I only am escaped alone to tell
thee. Then Job arose, and rent his mantle, and shaved
his head, and fell down upon the ground, and worshipped,
and said, Naked came I out of my mother’s
womb, and naked shall I return thither: the Lord
gave, and the Lord hath taken away; blessed be the
name of the Lord. In all this Job sinned not, nor
charged God foolishly.

Again there was a day when the sons of God came
to present themselves before the Lord, and Satan came
also among them to present himself before the Lord.
[Pg 4]And the Lord said unto Satan, From whence comest
thou? And Satan answered the Lord, and said, From
going to and fro in the earth, and from walking up and
down in it. And the Lord said unto Satan, Hast thou
considered my servant Job, that there is none like
him in the earth, a perfect and an upright man, one that
feareth God, and escheweth evil? and still he holdeth
fast his integrity, although thou movedest me against
him to destroy him without cause. And Satan answered
the Lord, and said, Skin for skin, yea, all that
a man hath will he give for his life. But put forth
thine hand now, and touch his bone and his flesh,
and he will curse thee to thy face. And the Lord
said unto Satan, Behold, he is in thine hand; but save
his life. So went Satan forth from the presence of
the Lord, and smote Job with sore boils from the
sole of his foot unto his crown. And he took him a
potsherd to scrape himself withal; and he sat down
among the ashes. Then said his wife unto him, Dost
thou still retain thine integrity? curse God, and die.
But he said unto her, Thou speakest as one of the
foolish women speaketh. What? shall we receive good
at the hand of God, and shall we not receive evil?
In all this did not Job sin with his lips.

Now when Job’s three friends heard of all this
[Pg 5]evil that was come upon him, they came every one
from his own place; Eliphaz the Temanite, and Bildad
the Shuhite, and Zophar the Naamathite: for they
had made an appointment together to come to mourn
with him and to comfort him. And when they lifted
up their eyes afar off, and knew him not, they lifted
up their voice, and wept; and they rent every one his
mantle, and sprinkled dust upon their heads toward
heaven. So they sat down with him upon the ground
seven days and seven nights, and none spake a word
unto him: for they saw that his grief was very great.

After this opened Job his mouth, and cursed
his day. And Job spake, and said,

[Pg 15]

[Pg 39]

[Pg 45]

[Pg 55]

[Pg 73]

So these three men ceased to answer Job, because he
was righteous in his own eyes. Then was kindled the
wrath of Elihu the son of Barachel the Buzite, of the
kindred of Ram: against Job was his wrath kindled,
because he justified himself rather than God. Also
against his three friends was his wrath kindled, because
they had found no answer, and yet had condemned
Job. Now Elihu had waited till Job had spoken,
because they were elder than he. When Elihu saw
that there was no answer in the mouth of these three
men, then his wrath was kindled.

And it was so, that after the Lord had spoken
these words unto Job, the Lord said to Eliphaz the
Temanite, My wrath is kindled against thee, and
[Pg 101]against thy two friends: for ye have not spoken of
me the thing that is right, as my servant Job hath.
Therefore take unto you now seven bullocks and
seven rams, and go to my servant Job, and offer up
for yourselves a burnt offering; and my servant Job
shall pray for you: for him will I accept: lest I deal
with you after your folly, in that ye have not spoken
of me the thing which is right, like my servant Job.

So Eliphaz the Temanite and Bildad the Shuhite
and Zophar the Naamathite went, and did according
as the Lord commanded them: the Lord also accepted
Job. And the Lord turned the captivity of
Job, when he prayed for his friends: also the Lord
gave Job twice as much as he had before. Then
came there unto him all his brethren, and all his
sisters, and all they that had been of his acquaintance
before, and did eat bread with him in his house: and
they bemoaned him, and comforted him over all the
evil that the Lord had brought upon him: every
man also gave him a piece of money, and every one
an ear-ring of gold. So the Lord blessed the latter
end of Job more than his beginning: for he had
fourteen thousand sheep, and six thousand camels,
and a thousand yoke of oxen, and a thousand she
asses. He had also seven sons and three daughters.

[Pg 103]

CECIL PALMER & HAYWARD

Contemporary Russian Composers

By M. MONTAGU-NATHAN

(Author of A History of Russian Music, Glinka, Moussorgsky, Rimsky-Korsakof,
The Piano Music of Skryabin, etc.)

With many portraits of famous Russian Musicians


Demy 8vo          ⁷⁄₆ net          Cloth


In this volume M. Montagu-Nathan introduces to the public a number of
Russian composers, who may be said collectively to constitute the contemporary
Russian School of Musical Composition, and who are maintaining for Russia its
supremacy among the musical nations.

Of such composers as Skryabin, Glazounof, Stravinsky, Rebikof,
Medtner and Rakhmaninof, the author provides a biographical account, and a
detailed consideration of their creative work; their aims and ideals are discussed,
and their music subjected to a critical review.

There are some chapters devoted to those younger men whose music has already
attracted considerable attention in Russia, and whose names are likely ere long to
become familiar to the musical world.

An introductory section of the book is devoted to a survey of the earlier period
of musical activity in Russia, in which the founders of the Nationalist movement
are dealt with and their artistic labours outlined.

THE PATH OF THE MODERN RUSSIAN
STAGE, and other Essays


By ALEXANDER BAKSHY      With 12 Illustrations


Demy 8vo          ⁷⁄₆ net          Cloth


The modern revival in the art of the theatre has been particularly marked in
Russia where it has revolutionized many established traditions, and has opened up new
paths of development. The remarkable progress of the Russian dramatic theatre is
of special interest to the student, since in no other country the new movement has
been fruitful of so many original ideas, or has had them realized in such striking forms.
In the present volume the guiding principles of the Russian stage, such as “faithfulness
to life” of the Moscow Art Theatre, the various forms of “conventionalism”
applied at the Theatre of Vera Kommissarzhevsky, and the theories of “theatricality”
lately propounded by Meyerhold and Evreinov, are subjected to a close analysis.
The book also includes separate essays on the forms of the theatre, as determined by
the relationship between the audience and the stage, and on the art aspects of the
kinematograph.

[Pg 104]

THE GIRL AND THE FAUN

By EDEN PHILLPOTTS

With four Illustrations in colour, and Title Page and Border designed by
Mr. FRANK BRANGWYN, A.R.A.


Crown 4to          6/- net          Cloth


Eden Phillpotts has been called “the painter’s novelist,” and in this work he combines his
peculiar power of bringing colour and form to the sense of his readers, with a story cast in classic
mould, full of explicit humour and implicit meaning. In his quest for beauty he has never been
more successful, while the co-operation of England’s greatest painter, Frank Brangwyn, A.R.A.,
who contributes four full page drawings in colour and title page border in black and white, will
place this work among the most notable productions of the War.

DELIGHT AND OTHER POEMS

By EDEN PHILLPOTTS

With twelve Illustrations in Black and White, by ALMA ELLIOTT


Crown 8vo          ³⁄₆ net          Illustrated Wrapper


As a laughter maker Eden Phillpotts has “done his bit” during these dark years, and all men
are agreed that the relief of light literature and humorous verse are very considerable in these
days. They rest and distract the mind, and remind us of Nietzsche’s aphorism that, “art is with
us that we may not perish of too much truth.”

A feature of the work is twelve illustrations by Miss Alma Elliott, which will attract the attention
of all lovers of art by their wonderful craftsmanship and imagination, and every effort has been
made by the Publishers to make this volume one of the best gift books of the season.

AN INTRODUCTION TO RUSSIAN MUSIC

By M. MONTAGU-NATHAN

Author of A History of Russian Music, Glinka, Moussorgsky, Rimsky-Korsakof,
Contemporary Russian Composers


Crown 8vo          ⅙ net          Boards


An Introduction to Russian Music is a small volume designed to afford a concise account
of the foundation and development of Russian musical art. It consists of a series of chapters devoted
to the most famous Russian composers. Prefacing these is an Introduction to the subject;
following them comes a sketch of what the author has styled The New Age in Russian Music; in
this section will be found the names of such as Stravinsky, Skryabin and Rebikof.

THE SILVER CHAIN

A Satire on Convention

By SIR WILLIAM BLAKE RICHMOND, K.C.B., R.A., etc.


Illustrated Wrapper          500 pages
Crown 8vo          6/- net          Cloth


Sir William Richmond’s eminence in the world of Art and Letters will command for his
long novel “The Silver Chain” a wide circle of readers. It is a work of great artistic achievement
and of scholarship and culture. Philosophy, psychology, a delightful sense of humour, subtle
analysis of the moods and motives of men and women, and a true and artistic presentation of
nature are the rich elements that make every page of this book of absorbing interest.

[Pg 105]

A BOOK OF LAUGHTER

By EDWIN PUGH

Author of “Punch and Judy,” “Harry the Cockney,” etc.

Specially designed Illustrated Wrapper by F. GARDNER


Crown 8vo          6/- net          Cloth


“When you want to laugh—mind you do.”—Eden Phillpotts.

“Laughter is day and sobriety is night.”—H. W. Beecher.

“Laugh when you can, it is a cheap medicine. Merriment is a philosophy, not
well understood. It is the sunny side of existence.”—Lord Byron.

“A Book of Laughter” is a book to read for oneself, a book to keep handy on
one’s library shelves, and an ideal gift book from friend to friend. A sense of humour
is the most precious quality of man, and laughter its most glorious attribute. The
exposition of the philosophy of laughter needs a born humorist, and that Mr. Edwin
Pugh most certainly is. “A Book of Laughter” is a subtle analysis of our various
ideas of humour, and illustrated throughout with numerous stories and anecdotes,
mostly original. There can be no question that Mr. Pugh’s new work will prove to
be the most humorous book of the year.

A YEAR IN THE GARDEN

A book about Gardens in Prose and Verse

Edited by NORAH ELIZABETH MUSTARD

With Illustrations in Colour by ELLEN WARRINGTON


Crown 8vo          5/- net          Cloth


—Wordsworth.

An anthology from the works of great authors giving expression to their appreciation
and love for the gardens which in so many cases helped to inspire their
work. The passages are so arranged in the form of a journal giving an extract in
prose or verse for every day in the year. A feature of the work is delightful illustrations
in colour by Miss Ellen Warrington, whose garden pictures have attained a
wide and well-merited reputation. The book is a welcome addition to the library of
the Garden, and will prove a most appropriate gift to Garden Lovers.

[Pg 106]


PRINTED BY
THE MORLAND PRESS LTD
LONDON
S W



Minor punctuation errors have been changed without notice. 
Hyphenation was standardized. Spelling has been retained as originally
published.

A table of contents has been created for this version.

In this version, page numbers in the List of Illustrations reflect the position of the illustration in the 
original text, but links point to current position of illustrations.

Changes that have been made: